Block Storage

- this is hard disk attached to your computers.
- typically, one block storage device can be connected to One Virtual server.
- there are exceptions where you can attach a read only block devices with multiple virtual servers and certain cloud providers are exploring multi-writer disk.
- you can also attach multiple different block storage devices to one virtual server.
- block storage can be used as;
  a) Direct-Attached Storage (DAS) - Similar to a hard disk.
  b) Storage Area Network (SAN) - High speed network connecting a pool of storage devices.
- are made use by high performing servers.

GCP Block Storage

1. Local SSDs.

- are present on same same host as your virtual machine.
- they are local blcok storage.
- has temporary data.
- their life cycle is tied to the VM instance.
- they are physically attached to host VM instance.
- provide very high IOPs and very low latency.
- it is an ephemeral storage in that data is held temporarily.
- enable live migration for data to survice maintenance events.
- data is automatically encypted and you cannot configure encryption keys.
- not all machines support local ssds.
- for better performance ssd, use larger ssds that is with more storage

Advantages of Local SSDs.

- very fast i/o 100x faster compared to persistent disks.
- high throughput and lower latency.
- ideal for use cases which require high IOPs while storing temporary information eg cache, temporary data, scratch files etc.

Disadvantages

- it is ephemeral in that it has low durability, low availability, low flexibility compared to persistent disks.
- you cannot attach and detach it from or to another VM instance.

2. Persistent Disks

- network block storage attached to your VM instance.
- it is provisioned that is you need to configure how much you want.
- it is very flexible that is you can increase it when needed when attached to vm instances.
- performance scale with size in that the more storage you have the higher the performance.
- has independent life cycle that is you can attach and detach from one VM instance to another.
- has regional and optional options.
- zonal persistent disks are replicated in a single zone.
- regional persistent disks are replicated in two zones in the same region.
- regional persistent disks are 2x costlier than the zonal persistent disks.
- can store two types of persistent disk storage.
  i) zonal - Data replicated in one zone.
  ii) regional - Data replicated in multiple zones.
- high availability data should be stored in regional disk storages.
- they are network storage that is they can be in another region.
- they are more durable.
- their life cycle is not tied to the VM instance.
- can be disconnected from on VM and attached to another vm instance.
- typical use case of persistent disk is if you want to run your custom database.

Persistent Disks - Standard Vs Balanced Vs SSD

- Underlying Storage
  Standard - hard disk drive
  Balanced - solid state drive
  SSD - solid state drive

- Referenced As
  Standard - pd-standard
  Balanced - pd-balanced
  SSD - pd-ssd

- Performance-Sequential IOPS (Big Data/Batch)
  Standard - Good
  Balanced - Good
  SSD - Very Good

- Performance-Random IOPS (Transactional Apps)
  Standard - Bad
  Balanced - Good
  SSD - Very Good

- Cost
  Standard - Cheap
  Balanced - In Between
  SSD - Expensive

- Use Cases
  Standard - Big Data(Cost efficient)
  Balanced - Balance between cost and performance
  SSD - High Performance

Persistent Disk - Snapshots

- takes a point in time backup snapshots of your Persistent Disks.
- you can also schedule snapshots (configure schedule of your snapshots)
- you can auto delete snap shots after x days
- they can be multi regional and regional
- the snapshots are backups of your persistent disks.
- you can share snapshots across projects
- you can create new disks and instances from the snapshots
- snapshots are incremental meaning it will only take snaps of data that are not already in the snapshot
- deleting a snapshot only deletes data which is not needed by other snapshots.
- keep similar data together on a persistent disk.
- separate your operating system, volatile, and permanent data
- attach multiple disks if needed.
- helps to better organize your snapshots and images.
  NB;
- avoid taking snapshots more often than once an hour.
- disk volume is available for use but snapshots reduce performance.
- schedule snapshots during off peak hours.
- creating snapshots from disk is faster than creating images; but creating disks from images is faster than creating snapshots.
- snapshots are incremental but you dont lose data by deleting older snapshots
- deleting snapshots only deletes data which is not needed by other snapshots
- do not hesitate to delete unnecessary snapshots.
