CLOUD SQL:

- Fully managed relational database service.
  Configure your needs and do NOT worry about managing the database.
  Supports all flavors of SQL.
  It is a regional service providing high availability. 99.95%
  You can use either SSD or HDDs. Use SSDs for best performance.
  Provides upto 416 GB of RAM and 30 TB of data storage.
- Recommended for simple rational use cases.
  to migrate local Mysql, PostgresSQL, and SQL server databases
  to reduce maintainance cost for a simple relational database
  NB: Use Cloud Spanner instead of Cloud SQL if;
  you have huge volume of relational data
  you need infinite scaling for a growing application (to TBs)
  you need global(distributed across multiple regions) database
  you need high availability
- Connecting to the SQL Instance
  use gcloud sql connect bixgcpmysql-instance --user=root --quiet
  provide password

- Cloud SQL Details
  overview - you can see the monitoring screen of your instace with public ip, connection name, configurations, shell, and service account.

- Cloud SQL Features
  automatic encryption(tables/backups), maintainance and updates.
  provides high availability and fail over; you can create a standby with automatic failover. Prerequisites are automated backups and binary logging.
  You can create read replicas for read workloads: Options are cross-zone, cross-region, and external (Non Cloud SQL DB).
  provides automatic storage increase without downtime (for new versions).
  Provides point-in-time recovery. Enable binary logging for this to work
  Backups(Automated and on-demand backups).
  Supports migration from other sources.
  You can export data from UI(console) or gcloud with formats like SQL and CSV.

- Cloud SQL - High Availability
  Create High Availability (HA) configuration.
  Choose Primary and Secondary zones within a region.
  You will have two instances; primary and secondary.
  Changes in primary are replicated synchronously to secondary instance.
  In case of Zonal failure, automatic failover to secondary will occur. Fail overs do not revert automatically if Primary Zone becomes available.
  NB: High availability set cannot be used as a Read Replica. Cannot connect to secondary instance while primary is running.
